So I just started recording.
So.
Let's start with a quick
recap of what we said last week.
We said that,
All the logic circuits can be
divided into 2 main
categories: combinational
logics or combination
circuits,
As opposed to the sequential
circuit. And in the combinational
logic, we said that this is
the symbolic diagram for
combinational circuit or
combinational logic, which means
that,
You have just input binary
variables. N input binary
variables and by just
combination of some logic gates
such as two level AND or two
level OR and NAND gates, NOR
gates and etc. Finally you're going
to have M binary outputs.
For each binary output, we
write a Boolean function, and
then we minimize the Boolean
function with Karnuagh maps or
algebraically or within Quine-
McCluskey algorithm and
etc.
The difference between combinational
logic and sequential logic is
that for the combinational
logic, there is no feedback.
So we have input, we have output.
But for the sequential logic,
one or more of the output
can be connected to the inputs.
So then it becomes sequential
logic that we will cover I mean
next week, which is the
Chapter 5: Sequential Logic.
Main property of combinational
logic is that
at anytime, if you
provide the value for the
input binary variables, with
some delay you're going to
have the output values for
the output binary
functions, boolean functions. In
this course we said that we can
assume that the delay is 0, but
in reality the delay is kind of
Delta T time. But the thing is.
This is the. This is the main
property.
We then categorize the
combination circuits or logic
into three main categories for
building a computer or computing
system. As we said, we could
design any logic circuits for
any problem. I mean, as long as
they can be reduced to
binary system. But for building
a computer system as a general
machine, we need to design some
important logic circuits or
logic units. These are
categorized into three main
categories. The first is those
logic circuits that are used for
arithmetic or logical operation.
Those for data transmission, and
those for coding.
Uh, in this course for those
regarding the arithmetical
logical operations, we
introduce binary adders,
binary subtractors, binary
multipliers, binary
comparators or magnitude
competitors.
For the data transmission, we
will introduce decoder, encoder
and multiplexer and
demultiplexer. These are
essential for adressing a memory
location in a computer system.
Uh, coders are a topic that we
skipped, the topic from
the first chapter, and I promise
to cover this topic I mean in
this chapter. So basically these
are using the binary numbers for
coding and willing to use them.
So with respect to the first
category, we introduce the binary adders and
subtractors. For the binary
adders, just a quick recap. We
introduced another for just
one bit. So 2 numbers each
which has one bit. This is the
one bit Adder, exclusive or
means the addition and AND
means the carry.
But we call this half adder
because we can only add 2 bits
and we showed it like this, and then
we said that in order to reuse
the half adder to add binary
numbers with more than one bit,
for instance 2 bit numbers, 3 bits
numbers, etc., we have to design a
full adder, which is able to add 3
bits, two input bits, plus a carry
from previous calculation.
And then we said that when we
design the full adder by truth
table, we figured out that in
the design, we have exclusive or
and AND, which implies there is
one half adder here.
So we could simply say that we could
design a full adder by one half adder
Plus additional gates. For
instance, one exclusive OR, 2
ANDSs, and one OR, plus a half
adder builds the full adder.
The difference of full adder
and half adder is that with the
half adder, we can only add
2 bits. The full adder we
can add 3 bits.
Both outputs are sum and carry,
and then when we pay more
attention on the full adder, we
see that we have another AND an
exclusive or which means that
there is one half adder, there's another
half adder inside the full
adder. So the question would be, is
it possible to design a full adder
by reusing two half adders?
And the answer was yes, and then
we design full adder using two
half adders and this is the
connection so, if you're given two
half adders, you have to simply
just attach the sum of the
first half adder to the first
input of the second half after.
And also you have to attach the
carry from the previous step to the second
input of the second half
adder, and we get the result of the
second half adder. But this re
connection, the sum is the final
sum, but the carry is the OR
between the carrier of the
second half adder and the
carry from the previous
half adder.
I already proved why this
is true and so simply you can
design full adder by using two
half adders and one OR gate.
And then when you have the
full adder, you can just
stack the full adders to
have an N bit adder.
So imagine you are given two
binary numbers, each of which
has four bits. For each bit, I
mean adding each bit, you can
assume that you're adding with the
carry from the previous step, so one
full adder, two full adders,
three full adders, and 4 full adders
is enough to do this calculation.
For N bit full adder, you need
N full adders. But one hint here is
that because always for
adding the first bit, always the
carry from previous step is 0 because
there is no previous addition.
We Have to assume that the first
carry is zero and whenever
the first carry is zero,
It means that you don't need
full adder for the 1st bit.
So I think I will leave it in
the lecture assignment that you
are able to build a four bit
adder by stacking 4 full
adder or stacking the first one
half adder and the three
full adders because the first
bit always has zero, so you
can simply not assume there is a
carry from previous step.
Anyways. So this is the full
adder for 4-bit value numbers.
As you can see, always zero goes
here. And this is a four bit. For
N-bit, we just stack N full
adders. The problem with the design
was carry propagation and the
reason was that we have to as
you can see here.
For the S2, we have to wait for
the carry from previous full
adder. For the S3 we need to
wait for the C2, which is still,
we have to wait for the C1. For
the S4, we have to wait for
carry three, which we have
to wait for the carry 2 and
carry one, etc. So if you have
more full adders it means that
you have to wait more for previous
carries. So it's kind of linearly
increasing for the previous
delay as you add
more full adders.
We said that the problem can be
solved with this solution, which
is called carry lookahead.
Basically, in this design, we
produce the carries in advance
before the addition, and it
takes just constant time,
constant delay for all the
carries, regardless of the
number of full adders, we can
produce the carries in advance
and then do the calculation in
this way, a number of full
adders for N bits addition
doesn't matter, always
constant delay.
This design is in
these pages in the book, so I
ask you to cover this and I'm
ready for your question in the
office hour if you have questions
regarding this design.
And then we introduce this
binary subtractor, which means
that in the uh, in the
signed 2's complement, the
subtraction becomes addition.
So basically a subtraction X -
Y becomes X + Two's
complement of Y, and the Two's
complement of a binary number is
the One's complement plus one.
The One's complemented is just not
each bit. And then not each bit,
which is one's complement plus one. So we
could really use the four bit
adder to do the subtraction
because we said that just with
an input one,
if M is zero, zero comes
here and zero exclusive or with
any bit is the same, it doesn't have
any impact. This is the property
of exclusive or gate. If you
exclusive or anything with zero,
the result is that input I mean
bit. So as you can see here,
if you input zero, the carry is
gonna be 0, here it's gonna be Y1 Y2 Y3
and Y4. So normal addition.
But if M is 1.
The first carry is gonna be one, and
if you exclusive or any bit with
one, it becomes not of that bit.
So here exclusive or with one, it
becomes Y1 bar, Y2 bar,
etc. And it becomes addition
with the Two's complement which
is One's complements,
NOT of each bit, plus one
in the carry.
And now we are going to
See how can we identify or
detect overflow when we do
the addition or subtraction
in signed-2's-complement.
So any questions about the
material in the previous week I
am ready to take that.
No questions.
So we can continue, so we
already covered when the
overflow happens in the
signed-2's-complement
calculation or arithmetic
in the lab assignment.
Actually, I mean for lab #5, we
said that you have to do
calculation in signed-2's-complement
and you have to
at least include two
instances of overflow.
And we already said that
overflow happens in the
signed-2's-complement, whenever the
addition of 2 positive number
becomes negative or the addition
of two negative numbers becomes
positive. But imagine we don't
know that knowledge. So I mean,
we imagine like all the previous
problems we want to design A
logic circuit to find overflow in
signed-2's-complement. An immediate
and naive approach is
I mean designing the logic
circuits using the truth
table. So basically we could say
that if you are adding
2 binary numbers, each of which
has four bits, so we have.
X1 X2 X3 X4 and we have Y1 Y3 Y4 plus
a carry from previous I mean
calculations, which is always 0.
For the addition and for this
subtraction, it is 1.
And etc., and then figure out when
the overflow becomes one.
But as you can see here.
Having a 4 + 4 + 1 becomes 9,
having nine input binary
variables produces 2 to the
power of 9 rows, so it's a huge
truth table. That is kind of
challenging. Even if you try for
the three bit adder, so you have
in the input binary variables,
you're gonna have 3 bits for the
first number, 3 bits for the second
number plus a carry, so it
becomes 2 to the power of seven
rows. So again, the truth table
is huge. And for the two bit
adder, again it's still huge
because 2 bits for the first
number, 2 bits for the second
number plus the carrier, so 2
to the power of five rows you
have to create and then you have
to determine which rule is going
to be one for the overflow.
So for detecting the
overflow, I mean designing
the logic circuit using the
truth table is very
challenging.
So. The second approach is
just using our prior knowledge,
so we already knew that
a subtraction in signed-2's-complement
is addition
with Two's complement. So if
we detect the overflow in
the addition, it means that
we could detect the overflow in
the subtractions, so
everything is reduced to one
operator: addition.
Also, we already knew
that if you're adding
two positive numbers.
If the result is gonna be
negative, it is an instance of
overflow and if you are adding
two negative numbers and the
result becomes positive, that
it is an instance of overflow
too and one thing is just to
mention.
Uh. Mention again is that for
the subtraction you have to 1st
make it addition with the Two's
complement, and then both I mean the
addition and subtraction becomes
sum. So after, for this
addition, after you make it
addition with this compliment,
you have to check this rule.
And then the third fact about
signed-2's-complement is that in
the binary system,
the most significant bit acts
like a sign. We already actually
showed this in a lecture
assignment and also in the lab
assignment. It acts like, it is not
similar to signed bits in the sign
magnitude system. But it is like
the sign bit and their
difference is that in the sign
magnitude, the signed bit doesn't
involve any arithmetic, but
for the Two's complement, all
the bits, including the signed
bit, is involved in the
calculation. So this is
already covered in the week
three of our course. We
said that
given our positions in the radix
complement. So the first range of
numbers are gonna be interpreted
as positive. For the base two,
the first range given N positions,
The Nth position. The
highest significant bit is
always 0 because this is the
Maximum number in the first
range of the numbers.
2 to the power of N - 1 divided by 2
becomes this number. And for the
second range of numbers, which we
are going to interpret as a
negative number, is that
number plus one, which becomes
this. So for binary system, this
is just a fact, that the
highest significant bit is always 1. So
instead of just calculating the
first half and second half and
etc., we can simply look at the
highest significant bit and
if it is zero, it means
that it is positive.
Maybe it's one, that means that it's
a negative number.
And based on this prior
knowledge, we can design a logic
circuit that detects the
overflow. So imagine we have, we
are given two binary numbers,
each of which has four bits.
I want to detect the
overflow, so as we said, we have
to check and just look at the
highest significant bit. Again,
as you can see here we are
including the highest
significant bit in the
arithmetic.
And also, we just check for the
overflow for the addition
because the subtraction at the
end of the day becomes addition.
So in this case we have to
just see the highest bit in
the first number and then
highest bit, the high
significant bit in the result.
So if we are adding two positive
numbers, meaning that the highest
significant bit is zero and the
result has one in the highest
significant bit, it means that
there's an instance of overflow.
But how it is possible to add two
0 and becomes one in the result?
The only possibility is that we
have a carry from the previous
addition. So if in the third
addition we have a carry which
goes to the 4th bit,
and both numbers are positive,
it makes it the result zero
and the carry for the last
one becomes 0. But 1 + 0 + 0
becomes one and there's no
carry for the last bit.
If we are adding two numbers
with different signs or for
instance here, a negative added
with a positive number.
We have to wait up until
the end, we have to add these
two bits. I mean the first bit,
second bit, third bit, and etc, and
see the sign of the
result, but the thing is,the
beauty of the Two's complement
system in binary system is
that it is always guaranteed
that the result, whatever the
sign is, is correct.
So if you don't believe me,
you can try different
instance. I mean negative
numbers are with the positive
numbers and see that the end,
I mean the end sign is
correct.
The same is when
we are going to add a positive number
with a negative number. So if
you are adding two numbers with
different signs, the result,
whatever the sign of the result
is is correct.
Another instance of overflow is
when you add two negative
numbers and the result is a zero
in the highest significant bit, which
means that it is a positive number,
so two negative numbers added
with each adder becomes a
positive number. An instance of
overflow. So when this happens.
There is no carry from the
previous step. And then two
negative numbers. So 0 + 1 + 1
becomes 2. Two is 0 here and
then last carry.
So all other cases, we don't
have any overflow. These are the
two only instances,
one of this is when we have
a carry, previous bit and the
last bit is 0. Last carry is 0.
All the other cases are correct,
and next instance of overflow is
when we have don't have any
carry from previous bit.
And as a result, we have a carry
for the last bit,
for the two negative
numbers, which becomes positive.
So as you can see here,
comparing the carries from the
previous bit and the last bit.
Again here.
1 0
And here. 0 1
So, in sum, overflow happens
when the last two carries
are in complement of each
other. So if you have a, for instance,
for four bit addition,
if you have a carry from the
3rd bit and there is no carry
from the 4th bit, or if you
don't have any carry for the
third bit and there's a carry
from the last bit,
If these two cases happens overflow
actually is detected.
So this is exactly the
exclusive or between
the last two carries.
For instance, if you are
given bit addition, you have
to just simply look at the
last two carries, the Cn-1
and the Cn. If the exclusive or
of them, meaning that one of
them only becomes one and the
other one is zero, it means
that there is an instance of
overflow in signed 2's complement.
These are all in the
signed-2's-complement.
So basically, if you are given
the I mean 4 bit adder/
subtracter as we already design
last week. You have to just
simply create a new I mean
wires for the uh, carry three
and carry four and then add the
exclusive or gate here.
And this, whenever it becomes
one, it means that there is
an instance of overflow.
In signed-2's-complement.
So. The next question is, as we
ask this question, I mean
last week, how about unsigned
numbers? And so in the unsigned
numbers, all the numbers are
positive. How about adding two
unsigned numbers, subtracting
two unsigned numbers or an
overflow of
arithmetic on two unsigned
numbers? There are
two ways to do that.
One way is using the prior
knowledge we said in the first
chapter, the numbering systen. In
the numbering system, we
introduced arithmetic first, for
instance for unsigned numbers, how
can we do the addition? It is
very similar to the I mean
decimal addition in high school
we know. Subtraction is based on
the idea of the borrowing. If
there is the last borrow, we have
to do another subtraction from
the highest number, etc. We
already covered this example in
the first lecture,
Arithmetic on two unsigned
numbers, but there is another
way. If you already knew that we
can do the arithmetic in
signed-2's-complement. One way could
be let's assume all the unsigned
numbers are signed positive
numbers. So we just simply
waste one highest significant bit
and always keep them zero.
And then I start the arithmetic.
For binary addition, so you
assume that the unsigned numbers
X1 X2 and X3 is 1 unsigned
number with three bit. So
you make it positive number.
For the second number, it's the same,
and then the addition is
like adding two positive numbers
in Two's complement.
For the subtraction, the same, if
you are subtracting two unsigned
number, you could simply assume
that you are subtracting 2
positive numbers. And
subtraction becomes addition
with 2's complement of the second
number. And then it is normal
addition with 2's complement.
The overflow again, it's like
detecting overflow in two's
complement, adding two positive
numbers. So if you add your
unsigned numbers, make it
positive, and then add, which makes the
result is negative, meaning high
significant bit is negative one,
that means an overflow
happens. And one thing is that.
You were supposed to add 2
unsigned numbers for three bits,
and then you make it positive
with four bit in twos
complements, but you can see
that this instance happens when
there is a carry here.
It means that in unsigned
addition, if there is a last
carry, it means that there's an
instance of overflow. If you
just add two unsigned numbers.
If you make it a positive
numbers in Two's complement, it
means that adding two
positive numbers becomes
negative and this is the only
instance, we have a carry from
previous bit and no carry in
the last bit.
So by Hossein's
way or my own way, we just
simply, the overflow happens when
there's a carry from the third
bit if you're adding two
binary numbers with 3 bits.
We can have a look in the
book. As I said, we already
covered this in the number
system chapter. You can simply
add two unsigned numbers and
if there's a last carry, it
means that there is an
overflow because sum cannot
be represented within number
of bits in the result.
Also the idea, with using
the idea of borrow, you can
do the
subtraction in unsigned
numbers.
And.
Yeah, so I just wanted to show you
that for
arithmetic on the unsigned
numbers, try to reuse the same
logic units we use for the Two's
complement. If you practice this
at home and look at the book,
you see that there is no need to
design a new logic circuit to do
the arithmetic on unsigned numbers.
As we said, based on the
Hossein's approach, my approach,
and also based on the books
approach, you always need one
logic unit to do the
arithmetic for both the sign
numbers and unsigned numbers.
And now, I'm going to continue
with two more logic units for
doing arithmetic. One of them
is the binary
multiplier, and then the next
is the binary comparator or
magnitude comparator.
Ah, I'm ready to take your
questions so far about the
Overflow and unsigned
number addition.
Any questions?
It's not a good sign that we
don't have any questions, so at
least send me some feedback just
to make sure that you have the
attention to the slides.
Thank you Matthew.
Thank you Gabe.
Thanks Marco, yeah, I mean in
the online teaching we have
to make sure that everybody
has their attention. Dennis,
Justin, thank you.
Adrian, Zack. Thank you. Thank
you. So we jave
have 28 students.
Brandon, thank you.
Hassan, thank you
so much. Thank you.
So it seems everybody has the
attention, so let's continue.
In the number system in the
chapter in the first weeks of
the course, we said that
multiplication and division in
the binary system or in any base
R or Radix system is similar to
the decimal system.
So whenever we wanted to
propose an algorithm to do
the arithmetic in base R, we
said that we already knew the
algorithm in the base 10, so
we can copy that algorithm
and adjust this for the base
R. R would be base two, base
five and etc.
Uh, so we didn't
cover the multiplier because the
multiplication in the binary
system is very similar to the
decimal system, but here we are
going to put more focus on that
because we are going to design
a logic unit or circuit to do the
multiplication for us.
So let's analyze that.
Uh. So for the start,
we assume that the two numbers
to be multiplied with each other
is unsigned, and as a practice
at home and also in the lecture
assignment, I put a question
about binary multiplication of
two signed numbers.
So let's first cover the easiest
one, the unsigned numbers.
So if you are going to
output the product of two
numbers, one of them is 4 bit
and one of them is 1 bit, so just
multiplying X by Y.
So. As you can see,
as you remember, in high
school, simply just multiply the
Y1 with each digit of the
first number. In binary system,
there's only two
operators. You remember in the
Boolean algebra, we have addition
and multiplication. The addition
is the same as the OR gate, and
the multiplication is the same
as the AND gate.
So in the binary system, when we
do the
multiplication, it means
ANDing the two bits, so
multiplying Y1 with the
X1 becomes the AND, so X1
AND by Y1. So this is the
1st digit of the result.
And then Y1 X2.
Y1 X3, the third bit,
and then Y1 X4.
So as you can see here,
multiplying a 4 bit or N bit
number with another number which
is only one bit, it means
just ANDing the second number
with each bit of the first
number. And this is
the most simplest
binary multiplier. Just one
bit, the product of 1 bit and
another number with
4 bits. If it's the first
number, if it is N bit, it
becomes one bit with ANDing with
each bit of the N bit number.
It results in N AND gates.
However, if you are given the
first number and the second number is gonna
be 2 bits, again from
high school, first bit gets
multiplied by the each bit of
the first number.
And then. Uh, when you start to
multiply the second bit of the
second number, you have to just
simply shift left.
And then start the
multiplication. So Y2 X1
becomes N1. Y2 X2 become N2. Y2 X3
becomes N3. Y2 X4 becomes N4 and
then you have to simply
sum the sub results.
The result of
multiplication for Y1
Plus the result of the
multiplication for Y2
which is already
shifted to the left.
Because Y2 is 1 bit, it is
more significant than the Y1,
so the result of the
multiplication is gonna be in a
higher order.
So M1 with zero becomes always
M1,  so the M1
0 becomes one,
which was the X1
AND with Y1.
For the other bits,
You have to do the audition.
But already right now you
have 1, 2, 3, 4 bit addition, so it
means that you can reuse the
four bit adder we already
designed. So for addition of these 2
four bit numbers, you could
simply use the four bit adder.
And here is the logic circuit
for multiplying 2 numbers, one
of them is 4 bit.
As you can see, X1 up until
X4 and the other one, the second
number is 2 bits, Y1 and Y2.
So the second number multiplied by
the 1st number, so Y1 X1 and
Y1 X2 and up until Y1 X4.
The 1st AND is gonna go to the result
M1, as you can see here. M1
because it's gonna be added
with zero so it directly goes to
the result.
What about the other ANDs? You
have to AND the X1 X2 and etc
with the AND of this second bit
of the second number. Y2 AND
by X1 (M1) and Y2 AND by
X2 (M2) up until Y2 AND
by X4 (M4). As you can
see here these AND here. So
let's come back to this slide,
Y2 X1. Y2 X2. Y2 X3. Y2 X4.
M1 M2 M3 and M4. So in this here, you can
see M1 M2 M3 and M4.
And then you have to add
M2 with N1. As you can see, M2 N1.
We have to add M3 with N2 and etc
and then the carry from the
M2 M1 goes to the this step. The
carry from this addition goes to
this step and etc.
So one.
The M2 plus N1. M3 plus N2 and etc.
The input carry is gonna be
0 and then you do the addition of
4 bits. And one thing that you
have to pay attention is that.
Let's come back to here. As
you can see here in the
last disposition of the
addition here,
because we did the shift left
for the second number, so it was
the higher order.
But here we have to do the
padding, so for padding for the
unsigned numbers we just simply
add zeros in the left.
So. That's why I put 0 here.
So n one n two n three n
four plus m two m three m
four 0. And these are the
remaining bits in the results.
This is just a
binary multiplier for.
The first #4 bit and the second
#2 can extend this.
Do multiply first #4 bit with
another number which has three
bits. So again, similar to the
multiplication in high school
for decimal system.
So this is the and of the first
step. y one, which each bit of
the first number m one m two
m three m four.
The 2nd row is the and of the
Y2, with each of each part of
the first number with one shift
to the left. And the third bit.
To shift to the left and then do
the anding, Y three and
X1 T1, Y3 and X2 P2 and etc.
So we already knew what's the
sum of the first two row.
1st two row is M1 s one s two
s3 s4,  based on the previous
logic circuit. So we have to do
another summation but this time
m one zero is still in one, so
everyone is still goes to
directly to the and.
S1 this time goes directly
to the and because as S1 + 0
is is still S1.
You have to re use another 4 bit
adder to do the addition of S2
S3, S4, And here you had
with zero. Is the 2nd
number P1P2P3P4?
And as a result you have M1S1
and this is the result of the
fourth addition for S2, S3, S4
and zero P1P2P3P4.
So this is the four bit addition
and this is the logic circuit.
So the 1st two row is exactly
the same same as previous
multiplication for the third
bit. Y three again? You have
to add Y three with each of
each part of the first number Y
3 X1 P one Y three X2 P2 and etc.
And then add this new number
with the previous result set.
And one interesting thing is
that here for the 2nd addition.
You have to attach the carry
from the previous four bits to
the. For with this to the second
four bit adder you cannot
simply add it with zero, and the
reason is. Here.
If you look at here so.
Just come back here.
So if you do addition for the
first two row.
It just Simply put this zero
here and then add them together
and after this addition it might
be with the P3.
Thought zero N four. There
might be a carry from N three
comes here. So it may generate a
carry to the next step and this
Carry goes here.
So cannot Simply put zero here.
So for this addition cannot
Simply put zero padded with
zero, because this is the carry
from the previous sum.
As you can see here, they carry
from previous, sum those here.
So you can generalize this logic
circuit to have to multiply.
4 bit number with another 4 bit
number so. If I'm going if I'm
going to add another bit to the
second number. So the same
so you have to just put
Y 4 here at another 4
bit adder and reconnect
the wires is on this idea.
The question about the binary
multiplier in a unsigned with
for the unsigned numbers is
that. If I'm going to multiply
an N bit X with M bit Y.
So X one X2 X3 up until XN.
Multiply by Y1 Y2 up until YM so
the question is, what is the
number of bits in the output? How
many output would be we have?
So let's look at this, the 1st.
Uh.
multiplication so 4 bits number
with one bit number. How many
result could we have?
The result is just 4 bits.
So I mean multiplying
4 bit number with one
bit number just 4 bit.
About two if you are going to
increase the second number into
2 bits, you see that the results
because of this shift from the
second bit then I have 5 bits.
M1,S1,S2,S3,S4 SO  five bits.
for the multiplication of four
bit number with three bit
Because of the two shift for the
S3, the result gonna have.
4 + 3 - 1 to
the result. Gonna have a.
4 + 2 Six bits the four plus
three 7 - 1 six so six.
If you include last carry.
If you include the last carry,
you could say that.
The first, the number of 1st,
bit + the number of 2nd
bits, second number, the number
of bits for the second number
plus the carry. So it becomes N.
Plus M - 1 + 1 which
becomes M plus N.
I leave it an in lecture
assignment, so but you can
practice it at home and you
see why.
This happens and this is true
for any basis for base ten base
five base two if you are
multiplying 2 numbers, the first
has n digit,  the second m
digit result gonna have.
N plus M digits including
the last carry.
Another question is that how
many and we need in a binary
multiplier multiply N bits
number with M bit number?
Another interesting question is
that how many adder we need.
And the other we use, for
instance, here we use the four
bit adder to in general how many
k bit  adder we need.
And what is the k?
Now example for the multiplying.
This one for the multiplying.
Number with four bits with
another number with three bit.
For the first two row, we need
one adder, for the second
two row. A second for the.
Last two rows we need another
adder to. Basically, as you can
see here. The number of bits
in the second number minus
one 'cause we need this
number of additional here.
So this is the number of adders
we need. But so as you can see
in the design, we need only.
The second number is 3 - 1
two, so we need two adders.
And what is the number of K
here? 4 bit adder.
And if in general we wanted to
determine what is the K for
multiplying a number with N
bit with another number M bit,
what is the K we can practice
at home and determined that I
leave it as a lecture
assignment that you think
about you can think about
that.
And.
Another design so that was the
first approach to design A
binary multiplier. Just
following the algorithm we learn
from the high school.
But another approach could be
this. Multiplication in excess
is equal to additional.
Basically, if you are going to
multiply a number X with Y, it
means that you have to add XY
times. Itself.
So let's do that. I mean, it's
like just using the and just use
the addition so.
4 bit adder I can say that
if X in one input an X goes to
the second input, it means that
X + X, which means that two
multiply by X so 2X.
So if you if we use another
adder. With the same input
for the x and the other
input with the result of the
previous additon, it becomes
X + X + X becomes 3X.
So it indicating that multiply
by binary digits 3.
So what's the problem with this
design? Why we didn't follow
this design? Anybody can
answer this question.
Yes, Marco says that it's it
has a high cost true. But
what is the cost?
Correct, actually is actually
correct. Yes, because you know
here. I know that the Y gonna be
3 so I have to add include two 4
bit adder. What if I change the
three to four? But if I have to
change it to five so if I change
the y I have to redesign the
logic circuit? So that's a huge
cost. You know. If you, for
instance, here if you want to
multiply by two, have to remove
the second adder. If you
multiply by three, you have to
add one more. If you wanted to
multiply by 4, you have to add
another four with that adder. So
by changing the second number
you have to change the whole
design. That's a huge cost, so
it's kind of a static
multiplication, not dynamic, so
this is not a.
Good design, so whenever you
change the y you have to
change the circuit. Basically in
programming is very long. For
instance, you hard code, I mean
variable. If for instance if you
variable which is always 3
and if you want to change it to
four, you have to change the
variable to four.
And recompile your program.
So this is static.
That's the problem with
this design.
Ah. How about this one?
I could say that if I'm
going to multiply X by Y i
can add Y times by itself,
but just reusing the.
I mean the result
intermediate results. For
instance, I run this addition
one time it becomes 2 X for X 1
+ X. It becomes X + X
and then run it. In the third
step. So just simply feed
full feedback outputs.
To the input the addition and do
another addition. So it
becomes a 3X and then again
output goes to input. It
becomes 4X and etc. So I run
this addition four Y times.
One problem with this is that
this is an instance of
feedback, so the output goes
to input, so this is not
combination logic anymore.
So this is considered as a
sequential logic. We will going
to. We will cover this addition.
I mean in the sequential logic.
So this is not combinational
logic anymore. 'cause we have
feedback from the output to the
input. And another interesting
question about this is that how
can I control the number of
times you know here as we in the
combination logic as well, as
long as we have the values in
the input. We have the values
for the output, so.
It's kind of the I mean, uh.
For loop or while loop forever
so it never stops. So how can I
stop the addition so it just
forever just add execute
itself? So how can I stop that?
So this question going to be
answered in the sequential
logic and this is nice design
but has its own complications.
And. I leave it as lecture assignment
for you. Think about binary
multiplier with sign number. The
only thing actually actually got
two things. You have to think
about that. First of all, the
sign of the result.
So here if you multiply 2
numbers. With the same sign for
instance 2 positive 2 negative
result is always positive.
But if you multiply 2
numbers difference.
Sign the result is always
negative, so the sign position
going to be always one.
This is one thing you have to
think about that the second one
is that. If the sign of, the
result is negative, it should be
in Two's complement, so you have
to design A logic circuit that
checks sign position. If the
sign is negative.
Which means that one you
have to make the Two's
complement of the other bits
to represent correctly.
So you can think about this
in the lecture assignment.
And the next topic gonna be.
binary, comparator or
magnitude comparator.
Any questions so far?
No questions.
So let's continue.
For the binary comparator,
meaning that just simply check
whether if you are given X&Y,
you have to check whether X is
greater than or greater than Y
that X is equal to Y or whether
X is lower than Y.
So this is the binary
comparator for unsigned. So we
start with the simplest one
unsigned and then later you
can check about the sign
version of the binary
comparator.
so.
If you remember we already
covered this in one of our
examples in previous weeks.
We already said that we designed
the logic circuits that this was
the problem. We given two
unsigned numbers X&Y.
He wanted to design the logic
circuits that says X is greater
or equal than Y or not.
So here we are going to say
strictly greater is strictly
lower or equal, but we already
designed the logic circuit for
greater or equal to 1.
So just as a reminder, I just
put this slide here based on the
truth table design. If you are
given a first number with two
bits and the second number with
the two bits, you have to simply
check whether the X is greater
or equal than Y and etc.
This is the sum of min term. This
is the product of Maxterms and
then we said that the product of
the maxterm is more efficient and
we designed the logic circuit for
that. This logic circuits just
simply compares the X with Y&X
is greater or equal than Y as
one, otherwise outputs 0.
Already covered this?
But here the problem is a little
bit different. Here we're going
to say that strictly greater.
Strictly lower or equal. So in
this problem, instead of just
having one output function, we
have three output functions.
So. These are the input numbers,
2 bit for the first # 2, bits for
the second number.
And three output binary
functions for each of the our
inequality. Check for instance,
if it checks is strictly greater
than Y. F1, either one
or zero.
If X is a strictly lower than
one, either zero or one, and if
they are equal as you can see
here, if you compare the output
functions. At anytime, one of
them becomes one and the other
ones becomes 0.
So the others become zero. The
reason is that if the numbers
are equal, it means that they
are not great. One of them is
not greater than that, the
other one and is not lower
than the other one so.
At anytime, if one of the output
Boolean function becomes one,
the other two becomes 0.
So if you start 00 so these are
equal. Other two functions
become zero. The first number is
1, the second number is 0 1 is
greater than zero, so.
F1 One becomes one.
Other two binary
output becomes 0.
The next row is a.
2 i mean 10 for the first number 2 is greater
than zero, so it becomes one and
the other two  function
becomes 0. And, etc.
So you have to just simply
compare the first number with
the second number and put the 01
to the F1 F2 and F3.
And then you have to write the
F1 as a sum of product by
looking at the entries with zero
with one or product sums by
looking at those entires with
values 0. The same with the F2 and
F3 as we already design any
logic circuits. And then you
have to minimize it and then
draw the logic circuit. But
The thing is.
Right now we are comparing two
binary numbers only with two
bits. Again, using the truth
table is challenging because if
the number of bits in the input
variables grows, it's very hard
to write the Boolean functions
and minimize them.
So imagine here if you have two
binary numbers with three bits.
Become 3 + 3 becomes 6 input
variables, it becomes 2 to the
power of 6 rows.
If you have two 4 bit numbers,
it becomes 4 + 4 eight, 2 to the
power of 8 row's.
So again, if the number of bits
grows truth table design.
Method is not a good approach.
So what is the next approach?
Reusing the already design logic
circuit? So we already knew the
binary addition an binary
subtraction and we already new
that the binary subtraction in
the Two's complements becomes
binary addition. So again, if
you are if you if you already
assume that the unsigned numbers
can be interpreted as positive
sign numbers. We can reuse
the binary subtractor in the
two's complement.
So we have to simply do the
subtraction and based on the
sign of the result, we could
determine X is greater than Y or
lower than Y or equal.
So imagine you are given two
binary numbers, unsigned 3 bit,
make it. Positive numbers in the
two's complements to positive.
Adding is sign bit.
And then do the subtraction.
The subtraction becomes addition
with Two's complements and the
only thing we have to look is
just the sign of the result.
If the sign of the
result is positive.
It means that we subtract X from
Y and the result is positive. It
means that X is greater or equal
than Y. So just based on the
sign of the result in the binary
subtraction, we can see whether
X is greater or equal than y,
but here is not the operator we
want. We want to check is
strictly greater than Y.
So we have to not only check the
S4, but also you have to check
the other bits. If the other
bits are all zero means that X
is equal to Y. If one of them is
non zero it means that the
result has a non 0 value.
Non 0 positive number, which
means that X is strictly
greater than one. So if we
don't have any.
We don't have the true value in
S4, meaning that all four
is 1. S4 become zero.
S4, becomes one and.
All of the other bits are one,
meaning that one of them is at
least one of them is 1.
It means that. One non 0
positive number in the
result, so x is strictly
greater than one.
However, if there is out of the
binary, subtraction is negative.
It means that the s4 is
1. It means that X
was lower than Y.
But the result is a negative.
And if this sign is zero and all
other bits are zero, it means
that the X is equal to Y because
X - Y becomes 0.
So you could simply say that as
S4 bar means
Positive number and.
All the bits.
are 0 this is the Norgate. As
you can see, or plus not
comes one. It means that the
NOR of the bits are one.
The only time that the result of
the Norgate become becomes one
is that all the inputs are zero.
All M becomes 0 plus not
comes one.
So based on this subtraction,
you can simply solve this
problem, and here's the design.
So this is the four bit
subtraction. X goes to one
input, Y goes to the second
input, and we make it.
M equal to 1. The addition
acts like subtraction and
based on the result.
We can see X is greater
than Y if we don't have,
S4 means positive number.
And also the or of the other
bits are one none.
0 positive numbers.
So X is greater than one.
If you have S4, meaning that the
negative number so X is lower
than Y. And if you have.
We don't have s4 means
positive number.
And all the entries are zero.
So the over becomes 0 plus not
times 1 one and one becomes one.
Then X is equal to one.
This is the second,
uh, approach to the.
Comparison between two
unsigned numbers.
The book there is another way to
do that, and I'm going to
explain that. In the book it
reuse the property of the X
NOR. We already
said that in the.
I guess this is for previous
work, yes. Previous week we
published a lecture assignment
about Xor and XNor and
the property of that one
beauty of the X NOR is
that we already proved that
when we design the full
adder using two half adders
using 1 half adder said that the
x nor is.
Not of XOR for the XOR,
only one of the inputs must be
one and the other one. Gonna be
0, but the Xnor it is called
equality gate, meaning that both
the input bits must be the same
other both are zero or both or
one. so. Based on the X
nor Gate and the property of
equality, we want to design the.
Magnitude comparator
or binary comparator.
So this is from the week four
based on the truth table. As
you can see here, if both are
zero or both or one output for
the X, not gonna be 1
otherwise or different bits
that are going to be 0. That's
why we call the X nor or not
exclusive or as equality gate.
So based on the exclusive or if
you are given two binary numbers
for instance 4 bits number.
You have to simply apply the
exclusive nor on each bit.
Because they if they are equal,
it means that the output of the
exclusive NOR gonna be 1.
And then you Add all this one
together. And this way
you determine whether
X&Y is equal or not.
If they are not equal, one of
these ones becomes 0. For
instance here. If X2 is zero and
X2 is 1. Sorry X2 is 1 and Y two
is zero exclusive OR gonna be 0
and then zero goes to the and
operator or gates and makes the
F2 0. Before the and gates all the
inputs must be one.
An if all the exclusive, nor
between the each outputs one
followed by the and. It means
that X&Y are equal.
This is for the F2.
How about one which is? Which is
about X strictly greater than
Y and F3, which is X
strictly lower than Y.
So.
Here is the I mean example to
show to come up with a algorithm
using the exclusive or for
comparing 2 numbers.
If these are the unsigned
numbers. So if in the unsigned
numbers the first number has one
in the highest significant bit
and the second number has zero.
Without the checking other bits,
we could simply say that X is
greater than Y because X has the
one in the highest significant
bit. And Y has zero? So
it's very I mean trivial
that X easier than Y. So
whenever we have X4 and we
don't have Y4 means that X
is greater than Y.
Same whenever we have the
highest significant bit for the
X is zero. An for the Y is 1. It
means that Y this time is
greater than X or X is lower
than Y. So whenever we don't
have X4 and we have a y4 it
means that Y greater than x.
However, if  X4 and YFour is
the same, both are zero, or both
or one in another way. If the
exclusive or is 1.
The next bit gonna
determine the.
The greatness, or I mean the
number is greater than the
second number or not. So if the
first is equal, we go to the
second lower significant bit.
same so if X is 1 and Y3 is 0
and we already knew that the
X4 Y four is equal.
Now we can say that the
first number is greater than
the second number.
If X3 is 0 and Y3 is one, we can
say that the second number is
greater than the first number.
And we already know that
the high significant bit
is equal with each other.
So in general, for the four
bits. Have to check the high
significant bits. If you have X
and we don't have Y or the
highest significant bit, it
means that X is greater than Y.
If the high significant bit
is equal means that both
are zero or both, or one.
We have to check the third.
If the third bit are equal,
it means that the first bit
is equal and the third bit
is equal. We have to check
the second bit.
An if the second bit is equal.
It means that we already know
that the 4th bit is
equal 3rd bit is equal and
2nd is equal. You have to
check the last remaining
lowest significant bit.
And this is the way we
check for the whether X is
strictly greater than Y or
not for the F1.
You can simply use the same
method to check whether the X is
strictly lower than Y or not,
that's. If X we don't have X and
we have Y4.
Or both are equal and we have
these third bits.
Don't have X, but we
have Y and etc.
And this is the logic
circuit design in the book
for the binary comparator
for unsigned numbers.
So again for the equality.
If the exclusive or of all the
bits in the 1st and 2nd number
and with each other becomes one,
they are equal. So let's this is
the final and and the first
input goes comes here here.
This one is.
A 3 bar.
Sorry A three B bar and.
goes to or?
And then B A3 bar and goes
to or followed by the not.
This is exclusive or.
Followed by the not
becomes exclusive nor.
Also, for the other input of
last and if you go here it goes
here. This is the exclusive nor
for the A2 B2 etc. One thing I
have to mention is that in this
slides I put the variable X&Y in
the book it puts A and B.
Also, in these slides I'll start
from the index one versus
X1X2X3X4 or Y1Y2 up until Y,
four in the book. It starts from
this zero actually doesn't
matter. As I said, the name of
the variable doesn't matter in
the logic design.
In the logic circuit design.
On so. For
the first category, we are
done, so we covered the
binary addition,
subtraction, multiplier and
binary comparator
comparator.
Sometimes we check for the sign
number. Sometimes we check for
the unsigned numbers.
We tried to reuse the signed
a design for the unsigned
one, but other I mean
combination. I leave it as a
lecture assignment at home.
You can think about that.
The next category, which we're
going to cover next lecture is
about data transmission using
the decoder. Encoder and
multiplexer. You have time. We
will cover the demultiplexer.
These are the logic circuits
that are not for the arithmetic.
But they are essential for
data transmission from the
memory unit to the CPU to do
the arithmetic. So basically
we need the transmission
will bring the data into the
arithmetic unit to do the
addition, subtraction, etc.
So this was the end of today's
lecture and I'm ready for your.
Question if you have any.
I think Sean oh Sean is already
joined, so Sean, whether any
question, the chat box, I cannot
see any question.
i don;t think any questions?
OK.
Marco, so we assume a number is
assigned unless specified.
Ah yes, yeah. Actually in any
question they specify whether
you design the logic circuit for
this sign numbers or unsigned
numbers. So there is no default
here, so you have to check the
question if they say it is sign
that is designed for the sign
and if they are said you are
doing the arithmetic and the
unsigned numbers you designed it
for the unsigned numbers, but
they have the.
Signed arithmetic is that
you can reuse it for the
unsigned numbers.
there are some, I mean ways. But if
you already mastered the
arithmetic for this sign
numbers, you can simply apply
for the unsigned. But just to
answer your question in the in
the design problem they say that
you are going to design for the
unsigned numbers or sign
numbers. But one thing is that
if you asked to design for the
sign numbers in the binary
system, that default is 2's
compliment so. Uh, whenever you
design A logic arithmetic logic
circuit for sign numbers, always
you have to assume that you are
in the Two's complement system.
If you are asked to design for
this sign magnitude, the
problem must state that so the
default for design numbers is
2's complement system.
Any other questions?
So I'm going to be in the office
hour, so if you have any issue
about the lecture assignments or
lab assignments, I'm ready to
take your questions.
Thank you, have a good day.